We're gonna talk about
DOM events as we saw in
the earlier exercises where
we're clicking a button.
You can listen to any DOM event on
any element, such as a click or
a pointer move or anything else by
using this little on directive.
So here and inside this application,
we have a div that we would like
to add an event handler to.
Do on :pointermove and then we're gonna
reference this handle
move function up here.
Right, and
now if we run the mouse over the iframe,
you'll see that the pointer is updating.
Actually, it looks pretty wild.
I don't think I realized that point and
move events will give
you fractional values or
maybe it's because I've zoomed in this
website for the sake of the workshop.
So I'm just gonna go ahead and
make that look
a little prettier,
get some math round in there.
Right, so much nicer, and
of course we don't need to have
a name function, like handle move.
We can just declare the function
in line if we want,
so we can we can just copy.
Oops, we can just copy
this whole thing and
put it in there if we like.
And I'm gonna turn it into
an a anonymous arrow function,
just cuz syntactically it's a lot simpler.
I'm gonna change the name
of the event to e, and
rather than assigning to
the properties individually,
let's just change this to m=xe.clientX,
ye.clientY.
ClientX and clientY are values
that you get inside any mouse or
pointer event handler and
it's the same deal.
It's giving us these fractional
values out of a kind of a OCD.
I'm gonna fix that with some math rounds.
Right, and
now we have an inline event handler that
is causing this value here to update.
And it's totally fine to use an inline
event handler as opposed to a named event
handler.
It's not gonna get, that function
isn't gonna get recreated every
time things change, which is what
can happen in some frameworks.
The compiler has always got your back.
It's gonna try and do the right thing.
We can modify events using
this concise modifier syntax.
So here we have a click handler that
is gonna cause an alert to appear
every time we click it.
We'll click that, click it again.
Just gonna keep on coming, maybe we want
this event to fire once and then for
that event handler to be unregistered.
So we can add the ones modifier like that
and now if you click it the first time,
it will happen, but then after that,
nothing happens at all.
Right, we've got a few different modifiers
that we can add, prevent default,
stop propagation.
Passive, non-passive,
capture it once self.
You can read about this in your own time,
we'll have exercises for each of these.
These are just things that make
your life a little bit easier
when you're dealing with lots of events.
And you can use multiple modifiers
together by chaining them using this
in text.
It's not just elements that fire events,
components can also fire events,
but the component needs to make
itself an event dispatcher.
So we've got two components in
this exercise, an App.svelte and
an Inner.svelte.
And the app is going to listen for
events from the inner, side inner.
We want to create this event dispatcher by
importing createEventDispatcher
from Svelte.
And then we'll create
a new dispatch function.
Now the reason that we need to do it in
two steps like this, first we import,
createEventDispatcher and
then we create the dispatcher,
is because when we call
createEventDispatcher,
Svelte knows that we're currently
inside the inner component.
Later when we call dispatch,
it knows that it's the dispatcher
that belongs to that component.
If we just imported a dispatch function,
then Svelte would have
no way of knowing which function
was actually dispatching the event.
Now that we've done that, so
the button, if you click it,
it will call this say hello function,
which calls that dispatch function.
Now that we've wired that up, we can
add an event handler inside App.svelte.
And it's exactly the same syntax
that we used with DOM elements.
On message equals,
then we've got a message handler
set up here and the message.
So we'll just feed that in like so and
now if you click the button,
it says hello, as you'd expect.
And there's nothing special
about the name message.
We could change that to say, greet and
then in App.svelte,
we'll change that also to greet.
And a component can have as many
different events as makes sense.
Now in some frameworks,
we don't have event systems.
Instead you pass call backs as
props into your components, and
that's a thing that you
can do in Svelte too.
It's really kind of
a personal style preference.
The basic advice is that your data
goes down and then events come up.
And whether those events are expressed
using event dispatches in Svelte or
whether they're expressed as callbacks
that the component then calls,
is really just a matter of code style.
I personally like the event style,
but it's up to you,
you're not forced to choose between one or
the other.
Okay, so facts about DOM events that
you'll know if you've used the DOM
a lot is that events bubble.
Which is to say that if you have
some element deep in your tree,
you can add an event listener on any
parent and the event will bubble up from
the event target to where your
event handler is registered.
That is not true with components,
component events do not bubble.
So if you want to listen to an event
on some deeply nested component,
the intermediate components need
to forward the event upwards.
And so in this case,
we have the same App.svelte and
Inner.svelte is in
the exercise that we just did.
But there's also now this Outer.svelte
which contains the inter spell component,
so this is the middleman that's gonna
need to forward the event from outer.
Now, we could solve this by going
through the whole rigmarole of
importing createEventDispatcher and
then creating a dispatch function and
then adding an event
listener to the inner here.
It's a lot of work,
it's a lot of boilerplate and
boilerplate is anathema to
the Svelte way of doing things.
So we have a convenient shorthand.
Instead, when this event gets dispatched,
we can just forward it to
the application by adding on :message.
And now, the outer component will
dispatch that message when it
receives it from the inner component.
And of course it works exactly
the same way for DOM events.
We have a big red button component
here and we have a button.
We want to get notifications of when
the user clicks on that button.
We've got our onclick handler wired
up already inside App.svelte,
I'm gonna call this handle click function,
so we just need to add an onclick to that.
And now when you press that button.
[SOUND]
Okay, that's enough of that.
>> Does forwarding only work with
events or callbacks as well?
>> No, it does not work with callbacks,
it is purely about events.
So if you're using the callback style,
then you will have to pass the callback
from the parent component through
the intermediate component to the child
component in the same way that you
currently need to add the forwarding
syntax for the events.
Okay, so we got a question in
the chat just now that was basically,
how do I know in Outer.svelte that I
need to forward this message event?
Where is that event coming from?
And the answer is, it's coming from us,
we added it ourselves.
In an App.svelte when we called dispatch,
the name of the event that we
pass into the dispatch function.
That is the name of the event that
gets emitted from the component.
And so anything that includes
Inner.svelte can listen for
those events or for
them rather by adding that.
And that will now cause the outer
component to emit a message
event that the app can listen to
with its own on message handler.
>> So a pop-up sound?
>> Yeah,
you can think of it that way, yeah.